An 18-year-old man was admitted to this hospital because of fever and pain in the lower abdomen, groin, and scrotum.
The patient had been well until 4 days before admission, when fatigue, subjective fever, and chills developed. The next day, he began having headaches, non- bilious nonbloody emesis, diarrhea, decreased appetite, low back pain, and dysuria. On the day before admission, he was able to drink only one glass of water without vomiting. His mother brought him to the emergency department of this hospital. He reported dry mouth, eye pain when he was febrile, and light-headedness. He had a history of exercise-induced asthma and had been hospitalized during early child- hood for diarrhea. He took no medications and had no known medication allergies. Immunizations were current. He lived with his mother, stepfather, and brother in an urban area of New England and attended high school. He was born in Central America, had moved to the United States at 15 years of age, and had not traveled outside the country since that time. The family had frequent visitors from Central America.
The patient had had a negative interferon-gamma release assay for tuberculosis 2 months before this evaluation. He was sexually active with one female partner and reported consistent condom use. Two months earlier, tests for human immu- nodeficiency virus, syphilis, gonorrhea, and chlamydia had been negative. He smoked one cigarette each day, used marijuana three times per week, and drank alcohol intermittently. He had a pet rabbit but no contact with other animals, no history of recent tick or mosquito bites, and no contact with sick persons. There was no family history of renal stones or autoimmune disorders. He denied hallucination or agitation.
On examination, the patient appeared to be tired. The temperature was 39.4°C, the blood pressure 125/67 mm Hg, the pulse 121 beats per minute, the respira- tory rate 36 breaths per minute, and the oxygen saturation 100% while he was breathing ambient air. The paraspinal muscles of the low back were tender. The remainder of the examination was normal. Results of renal-function tests were normal, as were the erythrocyte sedimentation rate, red-cell indexes, and blood levels of amylase, lipase, albumin, globulin, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, and direct bilirubin; additional test results are shown in Table 1. Urinalysis revealed