In this Journal feature, information about a real patient is presented in stages (boldface type) to an expert clinician, who responds to the information, sharing his or her reasoning with the reader (regular type). The authors_ commentary follows. A 54-year-old man presented to the emergency department with a 1-month history of edema in the lower legs and a 1-week history of abdominal pain. The abdominal pain was dull, was bandlike across the upper abdomen, and worsened with eating. In the days preceding presentation, he had intermittent nausea, early satiety, and diarrhea, but he reported no fevers, chills, or vomiting. The description of the upper abdominal pain as dull and bandlike suggests that the pain arises from an internal organ and its immediate peritoneal lining. Epigastric pain suggests gastroduodenal or pancreatic disease, and right subcostal pain suggests hepatobiliary disease. Abdominal pain aggravated by eating suggests a gastric ulcer or gallbladder disease. Disorders resulting in visceral abdominal pain are typically associated with various systemic symptoms such as anorexia, nausea, early satiety, and diarrhea. Pitting pedal edema that precedes the development of abdominal pain may indicate underlying heart failure or pericardial disease, liver disease, or the nephrotic syndrome, particularly if ascites is also present. Nonpitting pedal edema would suggest lymphatic obstruction or hypothyroidism. The patient had no known medical history other than obsessive_compulsive personality disorder (OCPD) and had avoided routine medical care for more than 20 years. He reported no illicit-drug use or alcohol abuse and no recent travel. He took no prescription medications but did report taking a probiotic supplement and 100 IU of vitamin A daily. The patient had formerly worked as a computer-network manager but was currently unemployed. His mother had coronary artery disease; there was no family history of gastrointestinal or liver disease. Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) may be observed in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder, although this patient has OCPD. Trichobezoars can develop if hair is swallowed and over time may lead to abdominal pain, nausea, and early satiety. The use of dietary supplements, including vitamin A, and herbal medications has become a major health trend in the United States. Liver injury, including noncirrhotic portal hypertension and cirrhosis, is a recognized complication of excessive consumption of vitamin A and may occur at doses as low as 25,000 IU daily; however, the patient reports taking only a low-dose supplement. (The U.S. recommended daily allowance is 3000 IU per day.) On physical examination, the patient appeared cachectic but was not in distress. He was afebrile and had a regular pulse at 66 beats per minute. The respiratory rate was 14 breaths per minute, blood pressure 103/73 mm Hg, and oxygen saturation 99% while he was breathing ambient air. A cardiac examination was normal, with no murmurs, rubs, gallops, or jugular venous distension. Both lungs were clear to auscultation. The abdomen was distended, with bulging flanks and a fluid wave, but was nontender and without palpable organomegaly. There was no jaundice, scleral icterus, gynecomastia, spider angiomata, or palmar erythema. Pitting edema was present in both legs from the feet to the knees. The neurologic examination was normal; asterixis was absent. The patient was admitted to the hospital for evaluation. Ascites was obvious on physical examination. Although the stigmata of chronic liver disease were not present, cirrhosis is the most common cause of ascites. Portal vein thrombosis in the presence of previously compensated cirrhosis may be manifested as new-onset ascites. Cancer is the second most common cause of ascites; the patient_s cachectic appearance increases the likelihood of cancer, although cachexia is nonspecific. The cardiopulmonary examination does not suggest heart failure. The nephrotic syndrome should also be considered in the differential diagnosis of ascites and pedal edema. The serum sodium level was 127 mmol per liter, potassium 4.2 mmol per liter, chloride 90 mmol per liter, bicarbonate 30 mmol per liter, urea nitrogen 8 mg per deciliter (3 mmol per liter), creatinine 0.69 mg per deciliter (5.7 _mol per liter), glucose 107 mg per deciliter (6 mmol per liter), and calcium 8.8 mg per deciliter (2.2 mmol per liter). The serum level of aspartate aminotransferase was 87 U per liter, alanine aminotransferase 50 U per liter, alkaline phosphatase 92 U per liter, albumin 3.6 g per deciliter, and bilirubin 0.5 mg per deciliter (8.6 _mol per liter). The prothrombin time was 13.5 seconds, and the international normalized ratio was 1.2. The red-cell and white-cell counts were normal; the platelet count was 106,000 per cubic millimeter. The urinalysis was normal, with no proteinuria. Tests for antibodies to the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis A and B viruses were negative. A test for hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody was positive, but the HCV viral load was undetectable. Computed tomography (CT) showed a smooth liver surface with possible fatty infiltration. There was large-volume ascites and no hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, liver masses, or hepatic vascular occlusion. The hepatic enzymes are only mildly elevated, and the test results for synthetic function are normal, indicating either compensated cirrhosis or minimal hepatocellular injury. The normal results on urinalysis rule out the nephrotic syndrome. Isolated thrombocytopenia suggests chronic liver disease with portal hypertension and is frequently observed in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, although splenomegaly and a nodular liver surface would be expected in cirrhosis. The patient may have spontaneously cleared HCV in the past, or he may have had a false positive test result for HCV antibodies. Cirrhosis could also cause hyponatremia, but other disorders (e.g., hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency, or the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion) should also be considered. Evaluation should include a diagnostic paracentesis with assessment of the ascitic fluid, including a cell count and differential count, measurement of total protein and albumin, cytologic analysis, and calculation of the serum_ascites albumin gradient (SAAG). Abdominal paracentesis yielded 2 liters of straw-colored fluid. The ascitic fluid albumin level was 0.9 g per deciliter, yielding a SAAG of 2.7 g per deciliter, and the protein level was 1.5 g per deciliter. The fluid contained no polymorphonuclear cells and grew no organisms on aerobic or anaerobic culture. The results of cytologic analysis were negative for malignant cells. A low-sodium diet and diuretic therapy with furosemide and spironolactone were initiated. The patient was discharged from the hospital, and a follow-up visit in the hepatology clinic was scheduled. A SAAG of 1.1 g per deciliter or higher is consistent with portal hypertension. Other causes of high SAAG include heart failure (although heart failure is usually associated with higher levels of ascitic fluid protein), hepatic vein obstruction (Budd_Chiari syndrome), and myxedema. CT did not reveal hepatic vascular occlusion, although angiography is the diagnostic standard for this condition. Myxedema ascites is also characterized by a high level of ascitic fluid protein (>2.5 g per deciliter). Dietary sodium restriction (2000 mg per day) and oral diuretics, usually furosemide and spironolactone, are the first-line treatment for ascites caused by cirrhosis or portal hypertension. Given this patient_s hyponatremia, electrolyte levels should be carefully monitored. Since the absence of polymorphonuclear cells in the ascitic fluid rules out spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, discharge with outpatient follow-up was appropriate. However, the cause of the portal hypertension remains to be determined, and additional laboratory testing should be performed, including measurement of serum ferritin level, followed by HFE genotyping if the level is markedly elevated, to assess for hereditary hemochromatosis, measurement of serum ceruloplasmin level to assess for Wilson_s disease, and testing for antinuclear antibody, smooth-muscle antibody, antimitochondrial antibody, and hypergammaglobulinemia on serum protein electrophoresis to assess for autoimmune liver disease. A liver biopsy will probably be required and will need to be performed by means of the transjugular approach, given the presence of ascites and the fact that this approach allows for visualization of the hepatic veins and measurement of the hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG). Subsequent outpatient evaluation for causes of chronic liver disease was unremarkable. Levels of iron, ferritin, ceruloplasmin, alpha-1-antitrypsin, thyrotropin, lipids, and glucose were normal. Tests for tissue transglutaminase antibody, antinuclear antibody, smooth-muscle antibody, and antimitochondrial antibody were negative. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed normal left ventricular size and function, no valvular abnormalities, and an estimated pulmonary-capillary wedge pressure of less than 15 mm Hg. Transjugular liver biopsy was performed. The results of hepatic venography were normal. The wedged portal venous pressure was 22 mm Hg, with an HVPG of 15 mm Hg (normal range, 5 to 10 mm Hg). Histopathological analysis of the biopsy specimen revealed no diagnostic findings. The elevated wedged HVPG, which is a direct reflection of hepatic sinusoidal pressure, confirms the diagnosis of portal hypertension. Transjugular liver biopsy, which has high sensitivity for the diagnosis of cirrhosis when multiple specimens are submitted for analysis, was unrevealing. Noncirrhotic portal hypertension is categorized as either extrahepatic or intrahepatic; if intrahepatic, it is categorized as presinusoidal, sinusoidal, or postsinusoidal. Schistosomiasis is the most common cause of noncirrhotic portal hypertension worldwide. However, the patient has no known travel history that would suggest this infection, and schistosomiasis is typically associated with a normal wedged HVPG (since the resistance to portal blood flow is presinusoidal) and with variceal bleeding rather than ascites. Vinyl chloride, copper, and arsenic have been reported to cause noncirrhotic portal hypertension, and the patient should be queried about possible exposures. Although the biopsy results did not indicate vitamin A hepatotoxicity, which would have been suggested by an increased number of lipid-laden hypertrophic stellate cells, vitamin A toxicity may also cause portal hypertension. Consequently, the dose the patient reported should be confirmed and the amount he has ingested over time determined. Idiopathic noncirrhotic portal hypertension is a diagnosis of exclusion; because sampling errors may occur when percutaneous or transjugular liver biopsy is performed, an open or laparoscopic biopsy may be necessary. On further directed questioning, the patient reported that he had initiated a vitamin regimen 6 months before hospital admission that included daily doses of vitamin A ranging from 7000 to 1,367,000 IU and that he had carefully recorded his daily doses in his personal vitamin log. His average daily vitamin A intake over the 6-month prehospital period had been 98,500 IU, but 14 days before admission he had decreased his daily intake to 100 IU. The patient reported that he had undertaken this regimen in an effort to improve his personal health, with no intention of self-harm. When questioned about extrahepatic symptoms of vitamin A toxicity, he reported anorexia, dry skin on his legs, nail fractures, and hair loss. His serum retinol level was 63 _g per deciliter (2.2 _mol per liter; reference range, 38 to 106 _g per deciliter [1.3 to 3.7 _mol per liter]). He reported no exposure to vinyl chloride, copper, or arsenic. This history of massive vitamin A supplementation strongly supports the case for vitamin A toxicity as the cause of the patient_s liver injury. The circulating form of vitamin A is a retinyl ester, and the serum retinol level, which was normal in this patient, does not reflect the plasma or tissue level of vitamin A. Although light microscopy typically reveals lipid-laden hepatic stellate cells _ the body_s storage vehicle for vitamin A _ ultrastructural examination with electron microscopy may be needed to appreciate the characteristic features of vitamin A toxicity, including perisinusoidal fibrosis and the accumulation of lipid-laden hepatic stellate cells. Other than directing the patient to discontinue vitamin A supplementation, which may reverse the portal hypertension, we should focus treatment on his ascites. Upper endoscopy should be performed to assess the patient for the presence of gastroesophageal varices. Liver transplantation may be required in patients whose liver failure progresses despite the cessation of vitamin A supplementation. Additional histopathological evaluation of the liver-biopsy specimen revealed dilated sinusoids and a few lipid-laden stellate cells, a finding that suggests hepatotoxicity induced by vitamin A. (These cells can be very difficult to detect, depending on the severity of the case. In this patient, they were extremely hard to find.) The patient was referred to a dietician and a clinical psychologist for cognitive behavioral therapy to address his dietary habits. At 1 year after discharge, the patient is doing well with cognitive behavioral therapy for OCPD, and the ascites has diminished, although he still requires low doses of diuretics. The alopecia, anorexia, and nail dystrophy have completely resolved. Commentary Portal hypertension, which is most often caused by cirrhosis, is seen frequently in medical practice. Noncirrhotic portal hypertension is much rarer, particularly in the developed world. One cause of noncirrhotic portal hypertension is hypervitaminosis A. Vitamin A is stored primarily as retinol in hepatic stellate cells and may cause portal hypertension when the cells become engorged, obstructing blood flow through the liver sinusoids (Figure 1Figure 1Liver-Biopsy Specimen.). Excess vitamin A also causes hepatocyte injury and necrosis. Hepatic stellate cells participate in the deposition of extracellular matrix; their continued activation may lead to cirrhosis.1 Dietary sources of vitamin A include its provitamin, beta-carotene (which is found in vegetable sources such as carrots and sweet potatoes), and its active forms (which are found in animal sources such as liver and egg yolk). Beta-carotene toxicity is exceedingly rare because its metabolism is highly regulated, although orange skin discoloration, or carotenemia, may result from subcutaneous storage of beta-carotene. Overdoses of preformed vitamin A caused by the excessive intake of supplements or massive dietary intake can cause toxicity syndromes. In one case series of 41 patients with vitamin A_related liver toxicity, daily intakes ranged from 20,000 to 400,000 IU for an average of 7.1 years,2 although single ingestions of more than 500,000 IU have been reported to provoke noncirrhotic portal hypertension. Numerous conditions may cause portal hypertension in the absence of cirrhosis by distorting hepatic architecture or increasing intrahepatic vascular resistance at the prehepatic, intrahepatic, or posthepatic level. Conditions that cause noncirrhotic portal hypertension at the prehepatic level include portal vein or splenic vein thrombosis and splanchnic arteriovenous malformation. Conditions that cause changes at the intrahepatic level include hepatic vasculitis, HIV infection, and infiltrative disease (medications may also cause changes at the intrahepatic level). The Budd_Chiari syndrome, inferior vena cava obstruction, and restrictive cardiac disease may cause changes at the posthepatic level (Figure 2Figure 2Selected Causes of Portal Hypertension in the Absence of Cirrhosis.).3,4 Several causes, including hypervitaminosis A, impair hepatic blood flow at multiple levels. Worldwide, schistosomiasis is the most common cause of noncirrhotic portal hypertension and is mediated by local inflammation and the microvascular obstruction caused by schistosoma larvae. When other causes have been ruled out on the basis of information from the patient_s history and the diagnostic testing, idiopathic, noncirrhotic portal hypertension may be diagnosed, especially in patients with chronic infection, thrombophilia, or immunologic conditions such as systemic sclerosis or systemic lupus erythematosus.3 Idiopathic noncirrhotic portal hypertension is more common in the developing world; one proposed explanation is that repeated bacterial gastrointestinal infections may cause septic microembolization of the portal venous system.3 When clinical and laboratory assessments suggest cirrhosis, invasive tests such as liver biopsy and the measurement of portal venous pressure are rarely needed.5 When ascites is due to cirrhosis, additional manifestations of advanced liver disease are typically observed on physical examination (e.g., jaundice, gynecomastia, spider angiomata, and palmar erythema), laboratory testing (e.g., coagulopathy, hypoalbuminemia, and hyperbilirubinemia), and imaging studies (e.g., splenomegaly and irregular liver surface). The absence of the characteristic findings of cirrhosis in this patient, despite his ascites, prompted additional diagnostic evaluation. Noncirrhotic portal hypertension was confirmed by the absence of cirrhosis on histopathological analysis and the presence of an elevated portal venous pressure gradient. In many reported cases, vitamin A_induced portal hypertension resolves within months to years after vitamin A has been withdrawn, although in several instances there has been progression to liver failure. After our patient stopped taking vitamin A, his anorexia, alopecia, and skin desquamation diminished. On the basis of the fairly normal liver parenchyma observed on biopsy, we anticipate that his portal pressures will normalize and his ascites will resolve. As seen in this case, vitamin A overuse is best identified by obtaining a detailed history rather than by measuring retinol levels, since serum levels poorly reflect total body stores.6 Once the diagnosis of noncirrhotic portal hypertension was firmly established, the history and the results of the laboratory tests, along with the liver biopsy, allowed us to rule out other causes. Directed questioning illuminated the extent of our patient_s overuse of vitamin A. Although a history of over-the-counter supplement use was obtained at his initial presentation, our patient had decreased his dose and reported only the amount he was currently consuming. This case underscores the importance of taking a careful history and then eliciting more details when diagnoses are elusive. Misdiagnosis or delayed diagnosis of noncirrhotic portal hypertension is common. In a case series of 69 patients with biopsy-proven noncirrhotic portal hypertension, the diagnosis was delayed for more than a year in 25% of the cases, and 7% of the patients received an erroneous diagnosis of cryptogenic cirrhosis.7 Delayed diagnosis of noncirrhotic portal hypertension probably stems from cognitive errors made during clinical decision making, and particularly from premature closure (i.e., failure to consider reasonable alternatives after an initial diagnosis has been made).8 Arriving at the correct diagnosis in difficult cases requires that clinicians remain open to alternative diagnostic considerations and selective further evaluation, including repeat history taking. Vitamin A supplementation remains an important public health intervention for the prevention of deficiency syndromes, including blindness, in areas where food stores are not secure. Paradoxically, almost 50% of U.S. adults report taking one or more dietary supplements, some of which carry risks of serious hepatoxicity.9 Hypervitaminosis A is a rare, though well-described, cause of liver damage. In excess, vitamin A is truly too much of a good thing.  Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org.  Dr. Saint reports receiving fees for serving on advisory boards from Doximity and Jvion. No other potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. The views expressed in this article are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the Department of Veterans Affairs.We thank the following colleagues for their contributions to this case: Dr. Mitra Barahimi, University of Washington Department of Internal Medicine; Dr. Zachary Goodman, Inova Pathology Institute; and Dr. Matthew Yeh, University of Washington Department of Pathology.Source InformationFrom the General Medicine Service (L.A.B.), Health Services Research and Development (L.A.B.), and Hospital and Specialty Medicine Service (L.A.B., P.B.C.) of the Veterans Affairs (VA) Puget Sound Health Care System, and Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine (L.A.B., P.B.C.) _ both in Seattle; and the Medicine Service, VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System (R.H.M., S.S.), and Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Health System (R.H.M., S.S.) _ both in Ann Arbor.Address reprint requests to Dr. Beste at the VA Puget Sound Health Care System, 1660 S. Columbian Way (S-111-GI), Seattle, WA 98108-1597, or at lab25@uw.edu."